agent/README.md, before:

# Gardener Agent Deployment

Automated deployment for Claude Code agent running on Raspberry Pi.

## Prerequisites

- Raspberry Pi with Debian 13 (Trixie)
- Repository cloned by admin user
- MCP plant-tools server running (http://localhost:8000/mcp)
- Anthropic API key
- Healthchecks.io account (optional but recommended)

## Quick Start

### 1. Configure Environment (Required)

Create `.env.agent` from the example template **before running installation**:

```bash
cd agent
cp .env.agent.example deploy/.env.agent
nano deploy/.env.agent  # Edit with your API key and healthcheck URL
```

**Note:** The installation script will fail if `deploy/.env.agent` is missing.

### 2. Run Installation Script

```bash
sudo bash agent/install-agent.sh
```

The script validates all required files exist, then:
- Create `gardener` system user
- Install Claude Code CLI
- Copy configuration files to `/home/gardener/`
- Install systemd service

### 3. Test Manually

Before enabling the service, test one execution cycle:

```bash
sudo -u gardener /home/gardener/run-agent.sh
```

Watch the output. Press Ctrl+C after observing one complete cycle (this may take several minutes).

### 4. Enable Service

```bash
sudo systemctl enable --now gardener-agent
```

### 5. Monitor

**View live logs:**
```bash
journalctl -u gardener-agent -f
```

**Check service status:**
```bash
sudo systemctl status gardener-agent
```

**View log files:**
```bash
sudo ls -lh /home/gardener/logs/
sudo ls -t /home/gardener/logs/agent_*.log | head -1 | xargs tail -f  # Follow latest
sudo cat /home/gardener/logs/agent_20250121_143000.log  # View specific log
```

**Note:** Each execution creates a new timestamped log file. At ~200KB per run and 144 runs/day, it takes ~36 days to accumulate 1GB of logs. If the log directory exceeds 1GB, the agent will signal failure to healthchecks.io (but continue executing)

**Monitor via Healthchecks.io:**
Visit your healthchecks.io dashboard to see execution history and alerts.

## Updating Configuration

To update the agent prompt, MCP configuration, or other settings:

1. Edit files in the repository (`agent/deploy/`)
2. Re-run the installation script: `sudo bash agent/install-agent.sh`
3. Restart the service: `sudo systemctl restart gardener-agent`

**Note:** The installation script overwrites all configuration files, including `.env.agent`, so make sure your changes are saved in `agent/deploy/` before re-running.

## Architecture

- **gardener** user: Runs Claude Code agent, isolated with no repo access
- **Working directory**: `/home/gardener/workspace/` (isolated from config files)
- **Session data**: `/home/gardener/workspace/.claude/`
- **Logs**: `/home/gardener/logs/`
- **Config files**: `/home/gardener/` (root-owned, read-only)
- **Execution interval**: 10 minutes between runs
- **Health monitoring**: Pings healthchecks.io before/after each execution

## Troubleshooting

**Service won't start:**
- Check `.env.agent` exists and contains valid `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY`
- Verify MCP server is running: `curl http://localhost:8000/mcp`
- View logs: `journalctl -u gardener-agent -n 50`

**Lock file errors:**
- Another instance may be running: `ps aux | grep run-agent.sh`
- Remove stale lock: `sudo rm /home/gardener/.gardener-agent.lock`

**Claude authentication errors:**
- Ensure `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` is set correctly in `.env.agent`
- Test as gardener user: `sudo -u gardener -i` then check environment

**Execution failures:**
- Check individual log files in `/home/gardener/logs/`
- Verify prompt.txt exists: `sudo cat /home/gardener/prompt.txt`
- Test Claude manually: `sudo -u gardener claude --version`

**Log directory exceeds 1GB:**
- Agent signals failure to healthchecks.io but continues executing
- Clean up old logs when convenient: `sudo rm /home/gardener/logs/agent_2025*.log` (adjust pattern)
- Or delete all logs: `sudo rm -rf /home/gardener/logs/* && sudo mkdir -p /home/gardener/logs`

## Security

The gardener user:
- Has no shell access (nologin)
- Cannot access the repository
- Cannot modify its own configuration files (all configs are root-owned and read-only)
- Cannot edit its own prompt or MCP server list
- Runs in isolated workspace directory (`/home/gardener/workspace/`)
- Config files in parent directory are readable but protected from modification
- Default operations happen in workspace, making accidental config access unlikely
- Can only interact with the plant via MCP HTTP API
- Can only write to workspace (`/home/gardener/workspace/`) and logs (`/home/gardener/logs/`)
- Runs with systemd security hardening (NoNewPrivileges, PrivateTmp)

**Directory structure:**
```
/home/gardener/
├── .env.agent           # API key (root:gardener 640) - readable but not writable
├── prompt.txt           # Agent instructions (root:root 644) - readable
├── .mcp.json            # MCP config (root:root 644) - readable
├── run-agent.sh         # Execution script (root:root 755)
├── logs/                # Log files (gardener:gardener) - writable
└── workspace/           # Claude runs HERE (gardener:gardener) - writable
    └── .claude/         # Session data (gardener:gardener) - writable
        └── settings.json
```

## Uninstalling

### Option 1: Remove Service Only (Keep User & Data)

Use this if you want to temporarily disable the agent but preserve logs and configuration:

```bash
# Stop and disable service
sudo systemctl stop gardener-agent
sudo systemctl disable gardener-agent

# Remove service file
sudo rm /etc/systemd/system/gardener-agent.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

The gardener user and all data in `/home/gardener/` remain intact. To restart later, just re-run `sudo bash agent/install-agent.sh`.

### Option 2: Complete Removal

Remove everything including user, logs, and Claude session data:

```bash
# Stop and disable service
sudo systemctl stop gardener-agent
sudo systemctl disable gardener-agent

# Remove service file
sudo rm /etc/systemd/system/gardener-agent.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload

# Remove gardener user and home directory
# This deletes: logs, .claude session data, all config files
sudo userdel -r gardener
```

**Warning:** This permanently deletes all logs and Claude's conversation history.

### Option 3: Remove User But Preserve Logs

If you want to keep logs for analysis but remove the user:

```bash
# Stop and disable service
sudo systemctl stop gardener-agent
sudo systemctl disable gardener-agent

# Remove service file
sudo rm /etc/systemd/system/gardener-agent.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload

# Backup logs
sudo mv /home/gardener/logs /var/log/gardener-agent-backup

# Remove user and home directory
sudo userdel -r gardener
```

Logs will be preserved in `/var/log/gardener-agent-backup/`.

Commit message:

Fix/change claude auth key and fix git repo (#48)
* Refactor authentication details: replace ANTHROPIC_API_KEY with CLAUDE_CODE_OAUTH_TOKEN in environment files and documentation

* Fix rsync command to protect .git directory during backup sync

agent/README.md, after:

# Gardener Agent Deployment

Automated deployment for Claude Code agent running on Raspberry Pi.

## Prerequisites

- Raspberry Pi with Debian 13 (Trixie)
- Repository cloned by admin user
- MCP plant-tools server running (http://localhost:8000/mcp)
- Claude Code OAuth token (generate with: `claude setup-token`)
- Healthchecks.io account (optional but recommended)

## Quick Start

### 1. Configure Environment (Required)

Create `.env.agent` from the example template **before running installation**:

```bash
cd agent
cp .env.agent.example deploy/.env.agent
nano deploy/.env.agent  # Edit with your OAuth token and healthcheck URL
```

**Note:** The installation script will fail if `deploy/.env.agent` is missing.

### 2. Run Installation Script

```bash
sudo bash agent/install-agent.sh
```

The script validates all required files exist, then:
- Create `gardener` system user
- Install Claude Code CLI
- Copy configuration files to `/home/gardener/`
- Install systemd service

### 3. Test Manually

Before enabling the service, test one execution cycle:

```bash
sudo -u gardener /home/gardener/run-agent.sh
```

Watch the output. Press Ctrl+C after observing one complete cycle (this may take several minutes).

### 4. Enable Service

```bash
sudo systemctl enable --now gardener-agent
```

### 5. Monitor

**View live logs:**
```bash
journalctl -u gardener-agent -f
```

**Check service status:**
```bash
sudo systemctl status gardener-agent
```

**View log files:**
```bash
sudo ls -lh /home/gardener/logs/
sudo ls -t /home/gardener/logs/agent_*.log | head -1 | xargs tail -f  # Follow latest
sudo cat /home/gardener/logs/agent_20250121_143000.log  # View specific log
```

**Note:** Each execution creates a new timestamped log file. At ~200KB per run and 144 runs/day, it takes ~36 days to accumulate 1GB of logs. If the log directory exceeds 1GB, the agent will signal failure to healthchecks.io (but continue executing)

**Monitor via Healthchecks.io:**
Visit your healthchecks.io dashboard to see execution history and alerts.

## Updating Configuration

To update the agent prompt, MCP configuration, or other settings:

1. Edit files in the repository (`agent/deploy/`)
2. Re-run the installation script: `sudo bash agent/install-agent.sh`
3. Restart the service: `sudo systemctl restart gardener-agent`

**Note:** The installation script overwrites all configuration files, including `.env.agent`, so make sure your changes are saved in `agent/deploy/` before re-running.

## Architecture

- **gardener** user: Runs Claude Code agent, isolated with no repo access
- **Working directory**: `/home/gardener/workspace/` (isolated from config files)
- **Session data**: `/home/gardener/workspace/.claude/`
- **Logs**: `/home/gardener/logs/`
- **Config files**: `/home/gardener/` (root-owned, read-only)
- **Execution interval**: 10 minutes between runs
- **Health monitoring**: Pings healthchecks.io before/after each execution

## Troubleshooting

**Service won't start:**
- Check `.env.agent` exists and contains valid `CLAUDE_CODE_OAUTH_TOKEN`
- Verify MCP server is running: `curl http://localhost:8000/mcp`
- View logs: `journalctl -u gardener-agent -n 50`

**Lock file errors:**
- Another instance may be running: `ps aux | grep run-agent.sh`
- Remove stale lock: `sudo rm /home/gardener/.gardener-agent.lock`

**Claude authentication errors:**
- Ensure `CLAUDE_CODE_OAUTH_TOKEN` is set correctly in `.env.agent`
- Test as gardener user: `sudo -u gardener -i` then check environment

**Execution failures:**
- Check individual log files in `/home/gardener/logs/`
- Verify prompt.txt exists: `sudo cat /home/gardener/prompt.txt`
- Test Claude manually: `sudo -u gardener claude --version`

**Log directory exceeds 1GB:**
- Agent signals failure to healthchecks.io but continues executing
- Clean up old logs when convenient: `sudo rm /home/gardener/logs/agent_2025*.log` (adjust pattern)
- Or delete all logs: `sudo rm -rf /home/gardener/logs/* && sudo mkdir -p /home/gardener/logs`

## Security

The gardener user:
- Has no shell access (nologin)
- Cannot access the repository
- Cannot modify its own configuration files (all configs are root-owned and read-only)
- Cannot edit its own prompt or MCP server list
- Runs in isolated workspace directory (`/home/gardener/workspace/`)
- Config files in parent directory are readable but protected from modification
- Default operations happen in workspace, making accidental config access unlikely
- Can only interact with the plant via MCP HTTP API
- Can only write to workspace (`/home/gardener/workspace/`) and logs (`/home/gardener/logs/`)
- Runs with systemd security hardening (NoNewPrivileges, PrivateTmp)

**Directory structure:**
```
/home/gardener/
├── .env.agent           # OAuth token (root:gardener 640) - readable but not writable
├── prompt.txt           # Agent instructions (root:root 644) - readable
├── .mcp.json            # MCP config (root:root 644) - readable
├── run-agent.sh         # Execution script (root:root 755)
├── logs/                # Log files (gardener:gardener) - writable
└── workspace/           # Claude runs HERE (gardener:gardener) - writable
    └── .claude/         # Session data (gardener:gardener) - writable
        └── settings.json
```

## Uninstalling

### Option 1: Remove Service Only (Keep User & Data)

Use this if you want to temporarily disable the agent but preserve logs and configuration:

```bash
# Stop and disable service
sudo systemctl stop gardener-agent
sudo systemctl disable gardener-agent

# Remove service file
sudo rm /etc/systemd/system/gardener-agent.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

The gardener user and all data in `/home/gardener/` remain intact. To restart later, just re-run `sudo bash agent/install-agent.sh`.

### Option 2: Complete Removal

Remove everything including user, logs, and Claude session data:

```bash
# Stop and disable service
sudo systemctl stop gardener-agent
sudo systemctl disable gardener-agent

# Remove service file
sudo rm /etc/systemd/system/gardener-agent.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload

# Remove gardener user and home directory
# This deletes: logs, .claude session data, all config files
sudo userdel -r gardener
```

**Warning:** This permanently deletes all logs and Claude's conversation history.

### Option 3: Remove User But Preserve Logs

If you want to keep logs for analysis but remove the user:

```bash
# Stop and disable service
sudo systemctl stop gardener-agent
sudo systemctl disable gardener-agent

# Remove service file
sudo rm /etc/systemd/system/gardener-agent.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload

# Backup logs
sudo mv /home/gardener/logs /var/log/gardener-agent-backup

# Remove user and home directory
sudo userdel -r gardener
```

Logs will be preserved in `/var/log/gardener-agent-backup/`.
